JUDY WOODRUFF: Now: A new study
raises even stronger concerns
about the risks of brain
injury from the country's most
popular professional sport.
It's the focus of our weekly
segment the Leading Edge.
And Hari Sreenivasan has the
story from our New York studios.
HARI SREENIVASAN: We have
known about the dangers of
hard hits and concussions from
football, and that many
players are suffering
from CTE, or chronic
traumatic encephalopathy.
But, yesterday, the largest
study to date concluded that
110 of 111 former NFL players
who had died and donated
their brains had CTE.
These included former
greats such as quarterback
Kenny Stabler and
linebacker Dave Duerson.
Researchers also looked at the
brains of 202 former players,
including high school and
college athletes; 87 percent
were found to have CTE.
The NFL released a statement.
It said in part: "We appreciate
the work for the value it
adds in the ongoing quest for
a better understanding of CTE.
The NFL will continue to work
with a wide range of experts
to improve the health of
current and former
NFL athletes."
Michael Alosco is a co-author
of the study from the Boston
University CTE Center.
Michael, thanks for joining us.
You and your researchers point
out that this is not a random
sample, that the group of
brains that you were studying
either came directly from
the athletes or from members
of their family who thought
there might be something wrong.
That said, what does this
information tell you?
What does this data point to?
MICHAEL ALOSCO, Boston
University CTE Center:
This is the largest case
series study to date
of CTE.
You know, it's among
football players.
The sheer numbers, the sheer
size of the individuals who
had CTE is really concerning.
It's really suggesting a link
between prior participation
in football and CTE.
It's really going to serve as
a foundation, as a rich data
source going forward to really
study this disease and
figuring out what causes
it and identifying the
risk factors and to
really better understand it.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Help
us understand what
CTE does to the brain.
MICHAEL ALOSCO: It's a
neurodegenerative disease,
so a neurodegenerative
disease similar to
Alzheimer's, but it's
very distinct from
Alzheimer's disease.
What we see in CTE is
this protein called tau.
Tau is a protein that helps
stabilize the cell, but in
CTE, it becomes abnormal.
And, specifically, it
starts to collect around
the blood vessels.
And it's located at the base of
the (INAUDIBLE) kind of right
below the bottom of the tissue
of the brain.
And it's a really
unique presentation.
HARI SREENIVASAN: So, Michael,
I know you sent us a slide.
We're going to put
that on the screen.
On the left-hand side, you kind
of see a cross-section of a
brain that's almost off-white.
And then, on the
right-hand side, you see
a lot more dark edges.
And that, I suppose,
is where the CTE is.
But what -- how does this
affect a player's behavior?
MICHAEL ALOSCO: We see
a lot of different types
of symptoms in CTE.
A lot of them are nonspecific,
meaning that, you know, we see
these symptoms across various
conditions.
However, in CTE, we're
commonly seeing behavior
changes, so we're seeing
aggressive behaviors,
violent behaviors.
We're seeing changes in
mood, like depression.
And we're also seeing changes
in thinking and memory.
What we need to identify is what
symptoms are specific to CTE.
And by doing that, it will
help us diagnose CTE in life
and really characterize it.
HARI SREENIVASAN: One of the
things I found interesting was
that you actually found this
in high school players.
And so that means that this
wasn't just the big-time NFL
superstars that were hitting
each other with tremendous
force, but does this
have a cumulative effect?
MICHAEL ALOSCO: That was
actually really surprising
to us as well is, we're
finding CTE kind of
across the levels of play going
from high school up to the
people who play professionally,
as you mentioned.
But we don't know how
much is too much yet.
You know, we don't know
what it means if you just
play high school football.
We don't know what that means
in terms of risk for CTE.
We did find it in
three individuals.
But we need to, you know,
identify those people
and follow them over
time to see what happens
to them.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Speaking of
that, while this is obviously
the gold standard, you have
someone's brain to
work with, but that's,
unfortunately, posthumously.
Is there anything that
science is doing now to
be able to detect and
diagnose and intervene
while a player is still alive?
MICHAEL ALOSCO: Right now, we
can only diagnose CTE after
death, as you mentioned.
Our work at Boston University
is also, though, studying living
subjects, and we're trying
to identify tools that look
at the brain, that look at
different proteins in the blood,
trying to identify these tools
that can detect CTE in life.
And we're really hopeful that,
you know, in the next five
or seven years, we will make
a lot of progress on that front.
HARI SREENIVASAN: It's important
to point out you're not
just focused on NFL players.
You have actually the
brains of athletes from
other sports as well?
MICHAEL ALOSCO: Right.
So, the paper that we're
talking about is all
about football players.
But, really, it's a brain bank
for all individuals who had some
type of exposure to repetitive
head impacts.
HARI SREENIVASAN: I think one
of the questions that parents
want to know is, should I pull
my child out of football?
MICHAEL ALOSCO: So,
that's the million-dollar
question we always get.
And it's a very tough question,
and the reason being is, we
know there's a lot of benefits
associated with playing sports
and participating in sports.
But this study and our findings,
they raise a lot of concern.
But we need to do
more future research.
We need to know more about the
disease, more about the risk
factors for the disease before
we can really make any
informed recommendations
about policy or about safety.
We need to learn more.
HARI SREENIVASAN: All right,
Michael Alosco, thanks so
much for joining us today.
MICHAEL ALOSCO: Thank
you for having me.